1.     Heard Sri N.I. Jafri, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by Mohd.
Zubair, learned counsel for the applicants and Sri Roopak Chaubey,
learned A.G.A. for the State.
2.     This application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed for
quashing the charge sheet dated 29.05.2020 as well as the entire
proceedings of Criminal Case No. 462 of 2021 (State vs. Sonu Qureshi
and others) arising out of case crime no. 251 of 2020, under Sections 153-
A, 420, 429, 188, 269, 270, 273 I.P.C. and section 3/5/8 of Prevention of
Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and section 11 of Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Act, 1979 and section 7/8 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,
pending in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mau. It is further prayed
that proceedings in the aforesaid case may be stayed, during the pendency
of the application.
3.     Sri N.I. Jafri, learned Senior counsel appearing for the applicants
submitted that applicant no. 1 is an Assistant Teacher in the education
department of the State, while applicant no. 2 is also working as Assistant
Teacher in Madrasa Darul Ulum Gausia Kasba Salempur, while applicant
no. 3 is running medical shop and applicant no. 4 is Hafiz Quran. All the
applicants have been falsely implicated in the case Crime No. 251 of
2020, under Sections 153-A, 420, 429, 188, 269, 270, 273 I.P.C. and
section 3/5/8 of Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and section 11 of
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1979 and section 7/8 of
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. According to counsel, the First
Information Report discloses the fact that two quintal 20 kg. of beef is
alleged to have been recovered from 10 persons including the applicants
along with certain other items. He submitted that the applicants are
qureshi by caste but not indulging in the business of meat. It was then
contended that the cow meat (beef) which was recovered from the
possession was sent for chemical examination and a report of the Forensic
Investigation Laboratory has been received on 05.09.2020 which does not
disclose that the sample sent for analysis is of cow. The report has been
brought on record as SA-1 to supplementary affidavit. He then contended
that after the FIR in question was lodged, the applicants were roped in
another criminal cases and case under The U.P. Gangsters and Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 was lodged being case crime no. 564 of
2020. The said proceedings have been challenged before this Court
through Criminal Misc. Application under Section 482 No. 21034 of 2021
and this Court on 16.03.2022 had stayed further proceedings in the said
case, copy of the order has been brought on record as SA-2 to
supplementary affidavit.
4.     Learned Senior counsel submitted that once the report of the
forensic laboratory is on record, no case under the Prevention of Cow
Slaughter Act is made out against the applicants and the proceedings in
case crime no. 251 of 2020 be quashed.
5.     Sri Roopak Chaubey, learned A.G.A. appearing for the State
submitted that not only the cow meat (beef) was recovered from the
possession but also 16 live cattle were also recovered from the possession
of the applicants and the other co-accused. According to State counsel, the
First Information Report is a detailed report which categorically mentions
that out of 16 live cattle stock which included 7 buffaloes, 1 cow, 2 female
buffalo’s calf, 5 male buffalo’s calf and one male cow calf. Thus, it is
wrong to say that FSL report gives a clean chit to the applicants, as 16
cattle were found in the possession of the applicants and other co-accused
and they were not having any license to run the slaughter house.
6.     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
on record.
7.     This application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed seeking
quashing of the proceedings of case crime no. 251 of 2020. The scope and
inherent power of this Court for quashing the proceedings under Section
482 Cr.P.C. has been under active consideration of the Apex Court right
from the year 1960. In R.P.Kapur vs. State of Punjab AIR 1960 SC 866,
the Apex Court laid the parameters under which proceedings can be
quashed exercising power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. Relevant part of the
judgment in R.P.Kapur (supra) are extracted here as under :
"It is well established that the inherent jurisdiction of proceedings
in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily
criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person must
be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at
an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to
lay down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of
this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and
should be exercised for quashing the proceedings. There may be
cases where it may be possible for the High Court to take the
view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings
against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the
process of the court or that the quashing of the impugned
proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal
proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have
been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears
that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of
the said proceeding the High Court would be justified in quashing
the proceeding on that ground. Absence of the requisite sanction
may, for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may
also arise where the allegations in the First Information Report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the offence alleged; in
such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First Information
Report to decide whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not.
It such cases it would be legitimate for the High Court to hold
that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of the
criminal court to be issued against the accused person. A third
category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High
Court can be successfully invoked may also arise. In cases falling
under this category the allegations made against the accused
person do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no
legal evidence adduced in support of the case or evidence
adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing
with this class of cases it is important to bear in mind the
distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence or
where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly
inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where there is
legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not support
the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S.
561-A the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to
whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the
function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be
open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction
and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the
accusation made against the accused would not be sustained.
Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent
jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of
quashing criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of the
judicial decisions on the point."
8.     In State of Haryana & others vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Suppl. (1)
SCC 335, the Apex Court relying upon judgment of R.P.Kapur (supra),
enumerated the conditions under which inherent power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. can be exercised. Relevant para 102 of the judgment in Bhajan
Lal (supra) are extracted here as under :
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the
principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of
decisions relating to the exercise of the extra-ordinary power
under Article 226 or the inherent powers Under Section 482 of
the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we
give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse
of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise,
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of
myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
1. Where the allegations made in the First Information Report or
the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not prima-facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused.
2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers
Under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do
not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case
against the accused.
4. Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence,
no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order
of a Magistrate as contemplated Under Section 155(2) of the
5. Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing
efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
7. Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala
fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with
an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and
with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."
9.     Thus, the Court while laying down the parameters had made it clear
that where the allegations made in the first information report or
complaint taken at their face value and accepted in entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out any case against the accused, the
proceedings can be quashed. Similarly in paragraph 102(5), the Court
made it clear that where the allegations are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis whereof no prudent person can ever reach a just
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused, then also power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be exercised. In
para 102(7), the Court held that where proceedings were with mala fide
and /or where the proceedings is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite
him due to private and personal grudge then also the Court can proceed to
quash the same.
10.    In Parbatbhai Aahir alias Parbhatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Kumar
and others vs. State of Gujrat and Another (2017) 9 SCC 641, the
Apex Court has laid down the parameters for quashment of first
information report/complaint/criminal proceedings in exercise of inherent
jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. Relevant para 16 of the judgment in
Parbatbhai Aahir alias Parbhatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Kumar and others
(supra) reads as under :
"16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on
the subject, may be summarised in the following propositions:
16.1 Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High
Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to
secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer new
powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in
16.2 The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to
quash a First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on
the ground that a settlement has been arrived at between the
offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of
jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by
the provisions of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. The power to quash Under Section 482 is attracted even if
the offence is non-compoundable.
16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction
Under Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the
ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
16.4 While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide
ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends
of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or First
Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the
offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately
on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
elaboration of principles can be formulated;
16.6. In the exercise of the power Under Section 482 and while
dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High
Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the
offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental
depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the
victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly speaking,
not private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The
decision to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on
the overriding element of public interest in punishing persons for
16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may be
criminal cases which have an overwhelming or predominant
element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so
far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar
transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate
situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
proceeding if in view of the compromise between the disputants,
the possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of a
criminal proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and
16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving
the financial and economic well-being of the state have
implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute
between private disputants. The High Court would be justified in
declining to quash where the offender is involved in an activity
akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The
consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or
economic system will weigh in the balance.
11.    In State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Laxmi Narain and Other (2019)
5 SCC 688, the Apex Court after considering all the earlier judgments laid
down the guidelines for exercising the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
for quashing the criminal proceedings. Relevant para 15 of the judgment
is extracted here as under :
"15. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of
this Court on the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed
15.1. That the power conferred Under Section 482 of the Code to
quash the criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable
offences Under Section 320 of the Code can be exercised having
overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or
arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes and
when the parties have resolved the entire dispute amongst
15.2 Such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions
which involved heinous and serious offences of mental depravity
or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society;
15.3. Similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences
under the special statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or the
offences committed by public servants while working in that
capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of compromise
between the victim and the offender;
15.4. Offences Under Section 307 Indian Penal Code and the
Arms Act etc. would fall in the category of heinous and serious
offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against the
society and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the
criminal proceedings for the offence Under Section 307 Indian
Penal Code and/or the Arms Act etc. which have a serious impact
on the society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers Under
Section 482 of the Code, on the ground that the parties have
resolved their entire dispute amongst themselves. However, the
High Court would not rest its decision merely because there is a
mention of Section 307 Indian Penal Code in the FIR or the
charge is framed under this provision. It would be open to the
High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section
307 Indian Penal Code is there for the sake of it or the
prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved,
would lead to framing the charge Under Section 307 Indian
Penal Code. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court
to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is
inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of
weapons used etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court
would be permissible only after the evidence is collected after
investigation and the charge sheet is filed/charge is framed
and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not permissible when the
matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate
conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this
Court in the case of Narinder Singh (supra) should be read
harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in the circumstances
15.5. While exercising the power Under Section 482 of the Code
to quash the criminal proceedings in respect of non-
compoundable offences, which are private in nature and do not
have a serious impact on society, on the ground that there is a
settlement/compromise between the victim and the offender, the
High Court is required to consider the antecedents of the
Accused; the conduct of the Accused, namely, whether the
Accused was absconding and why he was absconding, how he
had managed with the complainant to enter into a compromise
etc."
12.   In Mohd. Allauddin Khan vs. State of Bihar and others (2019) 6
SCC 107, the Hon’ble Supreme Court while dealing with the issue as
regards appreciation of evidence in proceedings under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
held that whether there are contradictions or/and inconsistencies in the
statements of the witnesses is essentially an issue relating to appreciation
of evidence and the same can be gone into by the Judicial Magistrate
during trial when the entire evidence is adduced by the parties, the Apex
Court declined to quash the criminal proceedings.
13.   In M/s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of
Maharashtra and others AIR 2021 SC 1918, after considering the entire
case    law       relating      to     the     power       to    quash       criminal
proceedings/complaint/FIR under Section 482 Cr.P.C., Hon’ble Supreme
Court has laid an exhaustive guidelines where are enumerated here as
"23. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, our
final conclusions on the principal/core issue, whether the High
Court would be justified in passing an interim order of stay of
investigation and/or "no coercive steps to be adopted", during the
pendency of the quashing petition Under Section 482 Code of
Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India and in what circumstances and whether the High Court
would be justified in passing the order of not to arrest the
Accused or "no coercive steps to be adopted" during the
investigation or till the final report/chargesheet is filed Under
Section 173 Code of Criminal Procedure, while
dismissing/disposing of/not entertaining/not quashing the
criminal proceedings/complaint/FIR in exercise of powers Under
Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, our final conclusions are as
i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure contained in
Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a cognizable offence;
ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the cognizable
iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence of
any kind is disclosed in the first information report that the Court
will not permit an investigation to go on;
iv) The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly with
circumspection, as it has been observed, in the 'rarest of rare
cases (not to be confused with the formation in the context of
death penalty).
v) While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is
sought, the court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to the
reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in
vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the initial
vii) Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an exception rather
than an ordinary rule;
viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping the
jurisdiction of the police, since the two organs of the State
ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are
complementary, not overlapping;
x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference would result
in miscarriage of justice, the Court and the judicial process
should not interfere at the stage of investigation of offences;
xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer
an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its
whims or caprice; xii) The first information report is not an
encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts and details relating
to the offence reported. Therefore, when the investigation by the
police is in progress, the court should not go into the merits of the
allegations in the FIR. Police must be permitted to complete the
investigation. It would be premature to pronounce the conclusion
based on hazy facts that the complaint/FIR does not deserve to be
investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law. After
investigation, if the investigating officer finds that there is no
substance in the application made by the complainant, the
investigating officer may file an appropriate report/summary
before the learned Magistrate
xiii) The power Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure is
very wide, but conferment of wide power requires the court to be
more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty on the
xiv) However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit, regard
being had to the parameters of quashing and the self-restraint
imposed by law, more particularly the parameters laid down by
this Court in the cases of R.P. Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal
(supra), has the jurisdiction to quash the FIR/complaint;
xv) When a prayer for quashing the FIR is made by the alleged
Accused and the court when it exercises the power Under Section
482 Code of Criminal Procedure, only has to consider whether
the allegations in the FIR disclose commission of a cognizable
offence or not. The court is not required to consider on merits
whether or not the merits of the allegations make out a
cognizable offence and the court has to permit the investigating
agency/police to investigate the allegations in the FIR;
xvi) The aforesaid parameters would be applicable and/or the
aforesaid aspects are required to be considered by the High Court
while passing an interim order in a quashing petition in exercise
of powers Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or
Under Article 226 of the 438 Code of Criminal Procedure before
the competent court. The High Court shall not and as such is not
justified in passing the order of not to arrest and/or "no coercive
steps" either during the investigation or till the investigation is
completed and/or till the final report/chargesheet is filed Under
Section 173 Code of Criminal Procedure, while
dismissing/disposing of the quashing petition Under Section 482
Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie of the
opinion that an exceptional case is made out for grant of interim
stay of further investigation, after considering the broad
parameters while exercising the powers Under Section 482 Code
of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India referred to hereinabove, the High Court has
to give brief reasons why such an
xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High Court of
"no coercive steps to be adopted" within the aforesaid
parameters, the High Court must clarify what does it mean by
"no coercive steps to be adopted" as the term "no coercive steps
to be adopted" can be said to be too vague and/or broad which
can be misunderstood and/or misapplied."
14.    In the present case, the applicants could not point out that no
offence was made out from the reading of First Information Report, apart
from relying the FSL report which was only to the extent that sample
which was sent for chemical analysis was not cow meat. However, 16 live
cattle were also recovered from the custody of the applicants and other co-
15.    Thus, as the applicants could not point out that allegations made in
the First Information Report even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not constitute any offence or make out a case
against the accused, or the allegations in the First Information Report are
so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent
person can every reach at just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused and lastly that criminal proceedings are
manifestly attended with mala fide.
16.    I find from the perusal of the First Information Report that prima
facie cognizable offence is made out against the applicants and only the
report of the lab about the chemical analysis of the sample which was sent
having been found not to be cow meat but 16 live stock cattle have been
found in the custody of the applicants along with other materials, a list of
which has been given in First Information Report and there being no
license with the applicants for running slaughter house, prima facie, the
offence is made out and charge sheet having been submitted, and there
being serious allegations, no ground is made out for quashing the
proceedings in view of law laid down by Apex Court in case of
Parbatbhai Aahir (supra), Laxmi Narayan (supra) and M/s. Neeharika
17.    The dictum of Apex Court is that the power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. should be invoked in exceptional cases where no offence is made
out or the allegation in the report on face of it does not constitute any
offence then such proceedings can be quashed.
18.    In the present case, the applicants had tried to set up defence by
bringing on record the report of FSL, but the First Information Report not
only discloses the recovery of the cow meat but also 16 live cattle stocks
along with other incriminating material. The defence so raised by the
applicants will be considered by the trial court and such defence set up in
the present application cannot be considered by this Court at this stage, at
the stage of quashing of the charge sheet.
19.    In the result, the application fails and is hereby dismissed.