1. Through the medium of this petition, the petitioner is challenging the
Verification No.09/222, of Anti-Corruption Bureau (NK) and prays
that the same may be quashed. The petitioner also prays that
respondent nos.1&2 may be directed to hold an enquiry into the
matter against respondent nos. 5 to 7.
2. The case set up by the petitioner is that an anonymous complaint
bereft of any particulars of the complainant was addressed to
Respondent-Anticorruption Bureau (for short “ACB”) on 25.02.2021,
leveling several allegations therein and that Additional Deputy
Commissioner, Baramulla, addressed a communication bearing no.
ADCB/DVO/ 2022-23/70 dated 30.04.2022, to respondent-ACB, in
response to a communication addressed on 10.06.2021, seeking to
enquire in furtherance to the complaint, intimating therein that the
allegations contained in the complaint are baseless and upholding the
impeccable service career of the petitioner and has placed on record
copy of the communication No. ADCB/DVO/2022-23/70 dated
30.04.2022, along with the report of the Tehsildar dated 20.04.2022. It
is also stated that the respondent no.4 on 16.06.2022, addressed two
communication to the Deputy Commissioner, Baramulla, seeking the
property statement, salary statement, contact number net Salary/GPF
details, posting details etc. of the petitioner. It is further stated by the
petitioner that while being posted in Rural Development Department
on the position of Block Development Officer for Block Singhpora,
District Baramulla, in the year 2018, she was approached by the
Respondent no.7 (Rafiq Ahmad) compelling the petitioner to meet
him by making the inappropriate advances and employing threats of
using the office of ACB (the then Vigilance organization) to the
detriment of the service of the petitioner in the event demands were
not met. It is submitted that the respondent no. 6 along with the
Respondent no. 7 have been persistently making such inappropriate
demands and the non-fulfillment of which has resulted in the
unmerited investigation/inquiry launched against the petitioner. In this
regard, it is submitted that the petitioner recently submitted a detailed
complaint to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, in
June, 2022, elucidating the role of Respondent nos. 5 to 7 in harassing
the complainant/ petitioner by using the criminal investigative system.
It is learnt that pursuant to the aforesaid complaint, the General
Administration Department has officially launched an inquiry against
Respondent nos. 5 to 7. It is also submitted that the petitioner is being
illegally implicated in a false and a frivolous case under Verification
No. 09/2022, Police Station, ACB, although the petitioner being a
responsible officer, is discharging her duties with honesty, dedication
and integrity. It is submitted that the petitioner has been exonerated by
the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Baramulla, in response to the
communication of the ACB, after the thorough enquiry and has
communicated to the ACBthat the petitioner is having impeccable
integrity and there is no question of being her involved in corrupt
practices. However, the petitioner despite exoneration by the
Additional Deputy Commissioner, Baramulla, is being harassed by the
Investigating Officer and Senior Superintendent of Police of the ACB
for the ulterior motives in order to have illegal favours from the
petitioner.
3. Respondents have filed the status report, wherein they have stated that
ACB J&K received about six different complaints against petitioner
and other officers/officials of Block Singhpora with different
allegations ranging from abuse of official position, embezzlement of
the Government funds in MGNREGA, Swatch Bharat Mission,
releasing payments without execution of works in block Singhpora,
taking bribe and commission for releasing payments of people under
MGNREGA, diversion of Govt. funds from intended purpose,
working for some specific people, taking bribe through staff VLW,
GRS etc. The complaints pertains to her postings in District
Baramulla especially her posting as Assistant Director Food
and he tenure as BDO Pattan Baramulla.
4. The brief details of these complaints and action taken by ACB have
been given by respondent-ACB in the status report, which is
reproduced hereunder:-
“Complaint No. 1: That on 26.12.2018 first complaint was received
by ACB titled complaint against BDO Singhpora )Ms. Sheeba
Inayat) lodged by one Aijaz Ahamd Dar S/o Gh. Mohd Dar R/o
Rakh-i-Duslipora Singhpora alleging therein that BDO is indulging
in illegal gratification, illegally/fraudulently executed some works
etc. The complaint was forwarded by ACB Headquarters to Director
Rural Development Department Kashmir vide No. ACB-RD-G-
24/19-1261 dated 18-01-2019 for conducting enquiry into the matter
& furnishing report. The report is awaited from Departmental
Complaint No. 2: That on 17.09.2020, second complaint was
received by ACB titled compliant against officers/officials of Rural
Development Block Singhpora regarding embezzlement in
MGNREGA funds of R. 1.99 lakhs during the period when Sheeba
Inayat was posted as BDO Sighpora so lodged by Ali Mohd and Gh.
Mohd both residents of village Hanjiwera Payeen Pattan District
Baramulla which was again forwarded by ACB Headquarters vide
letter No. ACB-RD-G-16/21-2513-14 dated 09.02.2021 to District
Vigilance Officer Baramulla for report into the matter. The report
from concerned DVO has been received by this office which is
under examination.
Complaint No. 3: That on 12.01.2021, third complaint was received
against BDO when Sheeba Inayat remained posted, JE, Farooq
Ahmad online clerk and Sarpanch of RDD block singhpora lodged
by Ali Mohd Dar and others alleging therein receipt of bribe by
BDO through online clerk, JE and Sarpanch in releasing funds under
SBM scheme, the poor people were neglected and those well off
were given benefits under scheme by these officers/officials etc.
requested for taking strict legal action against them. This complaint
was also forwarded to DVO by ACB Hqrs vide No. ACB-RD-G-
119/21-12420 dated 18.06.2021, for enquiry and report within
month. The report from concerned DVO has been received by this
office which is also under examination.
Complaint No. 4: That on 18.01.2021, fourth complaint was
received by ACB against BDO when Sheeba Inayat remained
posted, JE, VLW, GRS & officers/officials of RDD block Singhpora
lodged by inhabitants of village Hayibug Tanghoo Block Singhpora
through Sajad Ahmad & others, alleging therein corruption in
allocation under Swatch Baharat Mission scheme by BDO, VLW, JE
concern and demanded legal action against them. This complaint
was also forwarded to DVO by ACB HQ vide No. ACB-RD-G-
119/21-12420 dated 18-06-2021 for enquiry and report within
month. The report into the matter has been received from concerned
DVO which is also under examination.
Complaint No.5: That on 26-03-2021, fifth complaint was received
by ACB against BDO Rural Development Department block
Singhpora when Sheeba Inayat remained posted lodged by one Gh
Mohi ud-din Dar S/O Gh Rasool Dar R/O K.P Payeen Singhpora &
others alleging therein irregularities in release of benefits under
SBM scheme from 2018-2021 to beneficiaries of Halqa K.P Payeen
etc this complaint was again forwarded by ACB Headquarters to
DVO Baramulla vide RD-G-157/2021 for report into the matter
within one month. The report into matter has been received by this
office from concerned DVO which is also under examination.
Complaint No. 6: That sixth complaint dated 25-02-2021 was
received by Anti Corruption Bureau J&K from complainants namely
Abdul Hamid, Gh Rasool both resident of Singhpora District
Baramulla against BDO Singhpora Sheeba Inayat for indulging in
different & multiple acts of corruption and bribery and taking bribes
and commission from public in lieu of services, accumulation of
disproportionate assets etc. The allegations in the complaint were
very serious in nature with specific mention of amassing of assets by
the officer during her tenure as Assistant Director Food Baramulla
The contents of the complaint are reproduced in verbatim as under:-
“Sub: complaint against Sheeba Inyat as BDO and AD food. With
due regards we residents of Singpora want to draw your kind
attention towards the above mention subject and to inform you that
the above mentioned official is looting the poor people of the area
by charging Rs. 15000 to 20,000 per work which are not in actual
plans proved and has done hundreds of works of such nature in the
area in addition takes 10% on account of approval and passing of
bills and never releases any bill without taking money. Through
these illegal and unethical work practices the official has
accumulated wealth both in the form of immovable property (in the
form of bunglows, land plots, complexes) and movable property
(bank accounts, cars) worth crores. His record in the food
department also need to be verified. Therefore it is requested to
your office that necessary investigations and enquiry be taken up to
verify the assets of the official accumulated by illegal means to
save the poor of the area.”
On receipt of this sixth complaint, ACB Headquarters
requested District Vigilance Officer (DVO) Baramulla vide Office
Letter No. ACB-RDG-87 /21-11274 dated 10-06-2021 for
conducting enquiry and submitting report. In this regard report from
DVO 30-04-2022 was received by ACB HQ on perusal of the report
it was found that the report was inconclusive. As the DVO in its
report has relied solely on the submissions of the lady officer
without         collecting         any        details       of        assets
/expenditures/income/Benami etc accordingly decision was taken by
ACB to consider this matter as part of Verification No.BKB-09/2022
thereof as allegations in this complaint were mainly for possession
of disproportionate assets and the DVO has also concluded its report
with remarks “unless proved otherwise” which implies scope for
further enquiry in the same matter.
Complaint No.7: Meanwhile when the reports in rest of the
complaints forwarded to District Vigilance Officer for enquiry were
awaited from DVO/Director Rural Development Kashmir,& other
reports were being examined for taking further course of action a
fresh credible information was received by the ACB Headquarters
on 30-05-2022 against Ms. Sheeba Inayat (KAS), again with serious
and multiple allegations of abuse of official position, indulging in
corruption/bribery, allegations of misappropriation of Govt. funds in
the garb of execution of developmental works, causing loss to state
exchequer & accumulation of disproportionate assets.
The contents of the information received are reproduced in verbatim
as following.
“There are allegations of malpractices against Ms. Sheeba Inayat
(KAS), BDO Pattan and her activities have caused considerable
loss to the exchequer.
a) The officer remained posted as Block Development Officer,
Block Singhpora from 15 Mar, 2015 to 15 Oct, 2021 during her
tenure she is alleged to have misappropriated government funds in
the name of executing developmental works in her area of
jurisdiction and this way earned huge sums of money.
b) While being posted in the Block, she came in contact with one
Payeen, Pattan who is working as a salesman in CAPD
Department. He is considered to be very close to the officer and
his services were utilized by her in sale and purchase of land in the
area. This way huge profits were made by the officer.
c) As per reports, thirty kanals of land from one Sant Singh have
been purchased by the officer through one Manzoor Ahmad Bhat
@ Munna Draal near Bhat Complex, Hartrath Singhpora (mutation
of this land has not been done so far). Besides, the officer has
purchased one more kanal of land at Singhpora. The officer has
reportedly constructed an approach road to this land under
MGNREGA scheme and approximately rupees 2.80 Lakhs have
been expended for the purpose out of government funds.
d) Reports further reveal that for the construction of a ground in
the state land at Bhat Colony an amount of Rs. 46.00 Lakhs
(government funds) has been earmarked. So far Rs.26.00 Lakhs
have been shown expended on earth filling of the ground, however,
no major work is discernible at this place. The work was executed
through Shabir Ahmad (Sarpanch Halqa Hartrath) and a major
percentage of the amount has been allegedly shared by both the
BDO and the Sarpanch. There is no significance of the ground for
the locals and it would only help Manzoor Ahmad Bhat @ Munna
Draal who runs a Dawn Public School adjacent to the ground in
partnership with the said BDO.
e) The officer has also constructed a shopping complex near
Degree College, Baramulla which has been registered in the name
of her father. The corrupt practices by the officer and apparent
patronage she is providing to her conduits is detrimental to
government functioning.”
That on receipt of this information against Ms. Sheeba Inayat, Anti
Corruption Bureau Headquarters J&K ordered instant DA
verification No. 09-2022 vide communication No. ACB-Veri-BKB-
09/2022/E-162522/ 10961 dated 30-05-2022 into the allegations of
accumulation of disproportionate assets by Ms. Sheeba Inayat-KAS
as information given was clear and prima facie in nature and
continuously complaints were received against her by the Bureau
with serious allegations of criminal misconduct, indulging in
corruption, bribery etc.
This was seventh most credible & incriminating information
on the basis of which ACB ordered instant verification for probing
DA allegations against her. The procedure for conducting assets
probe i.e. DA probe has been laid down in the J&K Vigilance
Manual 2008 approved by Govt of the J&K vide No. GAD/Vig/22-
Adm/2008 dated 20-06-2008 and various circulars issued by ACB
Haqrs from time to time and the law laid down by Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India in various judgments delivered on DA probes
conducted by various agencies CBI/ACB of different states which is
being followed in the instant case.
5. The respondents have given brief details about the petitioner, which
are reproduced as under:
“During the probe, the service details of the lady officer were
obtained and it was found that Sheeba Inayat D/O Inayatulla Saraf
R/O Khawajabagh District Baramulla has been appointed into
Kashmir Administrative Services on 08/04/2011 and after initial
training remain posted at various places including Assistant Director
Food Baramulla, BDO Singhpora, BDO Pattan, it was during this
period that most of the aforementioned complaints were received
against her wherein the allegations of indulging in abuse of official
position, corruption, misappropriation of Govt. funds etc. have been
made against her.
It was also found during the probe that she was recently placed
under suspension when she was posted as BDO Singhpora
Baramulla for excess withdrawal of MGNREGA funds allotted by
the Govt. of J&K vide Order No.143-RD & PR of 2021 dated 11-06-
2021 titled “withdrawal of funds in excess from e FMS account by
the District Baramulla and District Anantnag under MGNREGA-
suspension of BDO’s.
It is also apt to mention here that her close associate namely Mohd
Shafi Rather a class IVth employee in CAPD with whom it has been
mentioned in the source input that she is having Benami property has
already two FIRs registered against him, one in ACB under FIR No
05/2020 and other in Crime Branch under FIR No. 07/2020 as well
as a separate DA verification No. 06/2022 at ACB and same are
under probe against Mohd Shafi Rather. She for most time period of
her service remained posted in her home District and recently was
transferred by Govt. from BDO Pattan, Baramulla to Deputy
Director, District Employment and Counseling Centre, Srinagar. In
view of these facts and the fact that already six complaints were
received by this Bureau against her & other officials working with
her and which were forwarded to DVO for probe, in addition to the
instant credible information, it is indicative that the reputation of the
officer is not good.”
6. After giving details about the petitioner, the respondents in the stauts
report, have given the details of ancestral property of petitioner,
agriculture/horticulture income, income from salary, scrutiny of the
bank accounts, huge expenses made during check period, allegation
of benami property, which are given as under:
It was found during the probe that she was having 06 kanals and 04
marlas of ancestral land along with other shareholders & the
following properties have been shown acquired through gift and
court decree by her mother which are also subject matter of probe, as
under what circumstances these were acquired .During further probe,
vide this office communication No. ACB-NK-FAK-3168 dated
25.06.2022 the details of property (ancestral, purchased, owned and
possessed) by the said public servant were sought from Tehsildar
Baramulla. The report received from the said office in this regard
vide letter No. Teh/Bla/ 0Q/894 dated 07.07.2022 revealed that
has three daughters namely Ms. Sheeba Inayat, Ms. Saba Inayat and
Ms. Aqsa Inayat. The report further revealed that land measuring 05
kanals 04 marlas comprising of Survey No. 685 (02 kanal 13 marla)
and Survey No. 686 (02 kanal 11 marla) is recorded in the name of
Raziya Akhter (mother of Ms. Sheeba Inayat) bearing Mutation No.
514 dated 21-08-1982 as Court Decree. More so, land measuring 01
kanal comprising of Survey No. 1772/674 min is recorded in the
name of Aqsa Inayat (sister of Ms. Sheeba Inayat) bearing Mutation
No. 1633 dated 03-05-2012 as gift. A two storied residential house
and a five storied shopping complex exists in the above mentioned
survey numbers. The ownership and connected issues with the assets
are being examined in the instant DA verification.
V. Agriculture/Horticulture income:-
During the probe conducted so far it has been found she possess 06
kanals and 04 marlas of ancestral land along with other share
«holders which is non agricultural in nature (Bagh-e-Khuski). No
income from Agriculture/Horticulture was found during the probe
conducted so far.
During the course of probe it was found that the officer was
not having any other legal/known source of income except her
salary, which has been worked on the basis of salary statements for
the check period to the tune of Rs. 67,85,682/-. The saving from
salary after deduction of verifiable kitchen expenses 1/3 of the NET
salary as per laid down norms is under examination.
VII. Immovable asset in the shape of five storeyed Shopping
As per the allegations the suspect public servant has
constructed five storied shopping complex at Khawjabagh
Baramulla. During probe its period of construction as per the
engineering expert examination has been found to be between the
years 2016 to 2021, which falls during her service period. It is
pertinent to mention here that the lady officer has willfully
concealed & falsely declared before the DVO that said property was
constructed before her maturation in order to get favourable report,
besides, the value of this five storey shopping complex is being
assessed through the experts from the engineering wing of ACB
Kashmir & has been valued more than one crore.
During the course of probe conducted scrutiny of the
statements of the bank account maintained and operated by the
suspect officer as salary account in J&K Bank Khawajabagh
Baramulla, it has been revealed that huge suspicious transactions
(i.e. cash deposits, transfers, credits into and debits from the
accounts) other than the salary have been made. During the probe
these are being examined to ascertain source of such
transactions/expenditures made by the officer. During probe some
more bank accounts are being examined.
IX. Huge Expenditures made during Check Period:-
During probe, perusal of the Bank account statement of the
lady officer it has been revealed that the suspect officer has made
huge expenditure over and above her earning from salary/saving
which are being examined. The probe conducted so far huge number
of suspicious bank transactions have been identified and are also
under examination.
X. Allegations of the Benami property to be probed:-
As per the allegations of complaint and information collected
during the probe in the instant DA verification, the following
Benami Assets of the officer are being probed:
A. Thirty kanals of land purchased from one Sant Singh
through one Manzoor Ahmad Bhat @ Munna Draal near Bhat
B. Purchase of one kanal of land at Singhpora, Pattan;
C. Possession of Dawn Public School on partnership basis
with Manzoor Ahmad Bhat @ Munna Draal at Harthrath
D. Possession of a plot of land measuring about 04 kanal 15
marlas at Revenue Estate Rajbagh Srinagar and
E. A residential house at Hyderpora Srinagar with her class
IVth associate Shafi Rather.
F. A residential house now sold out at Parimpora Srinagar
with her class IV‘ associate Shafi Rather.
G. Petrol Pump in partnership with Mohd Shafi class IVth
employee CAPD.
H. Property /House at Jammu in partnership with class IVth
Mohd Shafi employee CAPD.
I. Land at Bhat Colony Baramulla purchased in partnership
with Mohd Shafi class IVth.
J. Other Benami investments, Bank accounts, lockers etc.
It is humbly submitted that in the absence of further probe,
the Benami Assets which are suspected to have acquired by the said
suspect public servant are yet to be ascertained. It is pertinent to
mention here that the scrutiny and examination of huge bank
transactions as mentioned above prima-facie disclose huge
assets/expenditure disproportionate to the known source of the
suspect officer which needs thorough probe for logical conclusion of
the same.
The facts and circumstances enumerated above clearly depict
that the suspect officer in order to thwart the process of law followed
by the ACB regarding the conducting of probe into the allegations of
acquiring of disproportionate assets, has filed the instant writ
petition based on frivolous and concocted allegations against the
officers of Anti Corruption Bureau. She has done same on behest of
one her aides who is a class [Vth employee and the probe is being
also     conducted      against      him     also    for     possessing
disproportionate/Benami assets in a separate matter besides, there
are two cases of embezzlement and misappropriation one under
investigation with Anti Corruption Bureau having FIR No.05/2020
and another with Crime Branch Kashmir, FIR No.07/2020.”
7. It is also stated by respondents in their status report that Mohammad
Rafi, Dy.S.P., against whom petitioner alleges demand of sexual
favour since 2018 is not conducting any enquiry in any matter linked
with her and has no occasion to contact petitioner and that instant
impugned verification is being conducted by Inspector Farooq Ahmad
and same is being conducted as per laid down Vigilance Manual and
procedure applicable in such enquiries.                It is also stated by
respondents that petitioner was never called to the office of ACB in
person during the probe of the instant verification as such, the
question of harassment does not arise at all. However, as per laid
down procedure the officer was communicated through Deputy
Commissioner Baramulla for furnishing the service details of the
suspect related to her salary/GP Fund, posting etc so as to process the
probe into the instant verification. As the very basis of DA is failure
of the suspect officer to account for the assets/expenditures he/she
acquired during check period, accordingly the petitioner was given
opportunity to furnish the details of all her income, expenditures, bank
details, investments, plots, ancestral property other assets . In this
regard property Statements as per standard practice were also
forwarded to officer through Deputy Commissioner Baramulla with
the request to get these filled from the petitioner and return the same
after filling the property details. It is also stated that the details/
property statement were not received by respondent-ACB so far
despite lapse of considerable period of time. It is also submitted by
respondents that a concocted/false complaint with mala fide intent
was filed by the petitioner to divert the agency from basic issue, i.e.
DA probe initiated against her by ACB as per law and therefore in
order to culminate the probe in the disproportionate assets verification
on merits, petitioner may be permitted to conduct further probe.
8. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
9. The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner
cannot be subjected to unmerited and biased enquiry or investigation
launched at the behest of Respondent nos.5 to 7 in colourable exercise
of the official duty and that the impugned inquiry has already been
closed since the lodging of the anonymous/frivolous complaint on
25.02.2021 as the same being dispelled through the official
correspondence. It is also submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the impugned inquiry undertaken is without any
jurisdiction as being devoid of any legal basis and initiated for an
ulterior purpose under the garb of investigation and the petitioner has
an enforceable right against being subjected to such inquiry the
purpose of which stands vitiated under the efflux of law and that the
presumptive nature of bias being associated with the impugned
inquiry initiated pursuant to an anonymous complaint is without any
legal sanction and cannot be permitted to sustain. He also states that
the investigating officers associated with the impugned inquiry are
incapacitated with the association of bias in law and cannot be
permitted to subject the petitioner to an unfair investigation. It is also
stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned
inquiry initiated at the behest of the anonymous complainant and
being devoid of any credentials to satisfy the requirements of a lawful
complainant cannot be permitted to initiate the illegal prosecution
against the petitioner. It is also submitted that the genesis of the
impugned inquiry emanates from the impugned complaint, cognized
by the investigating agency is barred under law to be proceeded from
and the protection granted to public servants in immune from the
projections of anonymous complaints and cannot be permitted to
hinder or place an embargo on the functioning of the petitioner. It is
further submitted that the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
postulates impermeable protections of public servants with the object
of curtailing frivolous complaints and the legislative presumption is
always in favour of the public servant and the impugned inquiry under
guise of inquiry cannot be permitted to circumvent the statutory
protections and any violation thereto renders the impugned inquiry
without any justification in law and liable to be set at naught. It is
further stated that the impugned inquiry by the efflux of bias and the
protection provided under the Act of 1988, is rendered otiose. In this
regard, it is submitted that the enquiry has been launched in absence
of any prior permission granted by the Government and the same
cannot be permitted to be undertaken by the Respondent-Investigating
agency. The learned counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that
the primary object of granting such protection is to insulate the public
servants from the illegal effects of an unsustainable enquiry. The
scope of preliminary enquiry being widened to such an extent can
render the protections under Section 19 distant, and to safeguard any
enquiry has been subjected to the permission of the Government and
that the impugned enquiry being launched in absence of such
permission is devoid of any legality and is hence liable to be set aside.
He also states that the mobilization of the investigation being an
outcome of the bias, is an abuse of the process of law and such a
practice is discouraged by various judicial pronouncements which
impair the functioning of the public officials leading to demoralization
and undue harassment and that since there are no prospects of
conviction on the basis of material placed on record nor the same can
be foreseen from the legality of investigation, therefore, the
enquiry/investigation conducted against the petitioner cannot be
countenanced under law and the inherent jurisdiction of this Hon’ble
Court is sought to remedy the wrong. It is also stated that the ACB
during the probe has not followed the Circulars of General
Administrative Department and the Central Vigilance Commission
whereby the clear guidelines have been issued with regard to the
complaints to be registered against the Government servants and other
officers. In this regard, it is submitted that there are clear guidelines
issued by the General Administration Department and Central
Vigilance Commission with regard to complaint to be registered and
to be investigated upon.
10.The petitioner seeks exercise of inherent powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. to quash the impugned verification. Thus, it would be
appropriate to say that the scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C. is well
defined and inherent powers could be exercised by the High Court to
give effect to an order under the Code, to prevent abuse of the process
of court; and to otherwise secure the ends of justice. This
extraordinary power is to be exercised ex debito justitiae. However, in
exercise of such powers, it is not permissible for the High Court to
appreciate the evidence as it can only evaluate material documents on
record to the extent of its prima facie satisfaction about existence of
sufficient ground for proceedings against accused and the court cannot
look into materials, acceptability of which is essentially a matter for
trial.
11.The judicial conscience of the High Court should persuade it to quash
such criminal proceedings in exercise of power vested in it under
Section 482 Cr.P.C., if answer to all the steps, as enumerated herein
after, is in affirmative, has been so said by the Supreme Court in Rajiv
Thapar v Madan Lal Kapoor, 2013 (3) SCC 330:-
“Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we
would delineate the following steps to determine the veracity of a
prayer for quashing, raised by an accused by invoking the power
vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of
i. Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is
sound, reasonable, and indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling
and impeccable quality?
ii. Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused,
would rule out the assertions contained in the charges levelled
against the accused, i.e., the material is sufficient to reject and
overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e., the
material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to
dismiss and condemn the factual basis of the accusations as false.
iii. Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused,
has not been refuted by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the
material is such, that it cannot be justifiably refuted by the
prosecution/complainant?
iv. Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an
abuse of process of the court, and would not serve the ends of
12.The case in hand, when examined on the touchstone of law laid down
by the Supreme Court, does not at all persuade this Court to grant the
relief prayed for by the petitioner in the instant petition. It is well
settled law that Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
empowers the High Court to exercise its inherent powers to prevent
abuse of the process of Court. The Supreme Court in State of
Telangana v. Habib Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC
779, has held that the powers under Section 482 Cr.PC or under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to quash the FIR, is to be
exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or
smother the prosecution that is legitimate. Inherent powers do not
confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to
whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised sparingly, with
circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. Inherent powers in a
matter of quashing FIR have to be exercised sparingly and with
caution and only when such exercise is justifying by the test
specifically laid down in provision itself. Power under Section 482
Cr.PC, is a very wide, but conferment of wide power requires the
Court to be more conscious. It casts an onerous and more diligent
duty on the Court.
13.The Supreme Court in State of Telangana v.            Habib Abdullah
Jeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC 779, has held that the powers under
Section 482 Cr.PC or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
to quash the FIR, is to be exercised in a very sparing manner as is not
to be used to choke or smother the prosecution that is legitimate.
Inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the High
Court to act according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be
exercised sparingly, with circumspection and in the rarest of rare
cases. Inherent powers in a matter of quashing FIR have to be
exercised sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is
justifying by the test specifically laid down in provision itself. Power
under Section 482 Cr.PC, is a very wide, but conferment of wide
power requires the Court to be more conscious. It casts an onerous
and more diligent duty on the Court.
14.The Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v.
Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, has elaborately
considered scope and ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. and Article 226 of
the Constitution of India in the background of quashing the
proceedings in criminal investigation. After noticing various earlier
pronouncements, the Supreme Court made certain categories of cases
by way of illustration, where the power under Section 482 Cr. P.C.
can be exercised to prevent abuse of the process of the Court or secure
ends of justice. Paragraph 102, which gives seven categories of cases
where power can be exercised under Section 482 Cr. P.C. are
reproduced as follows:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant
provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles
of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to
the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have
extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories
of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be
exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be
possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently
channelized and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to
give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such
power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose
a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police
officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same
do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on
the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and
personal grudge.”
15.In another case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga
Swamy, reported in (2004) 6 SCC 522, the Supreme Court, while
dealing with inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482 Cr.
P.C., has observed and held as under:
“5. Exercise of power under Section 482of the Code in a case of
this nature is the exception and not the rule. The Section does not
confer any new powers on the High Court. It only saves the
inherent power which the Court possessed before the enactment
of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the
inherent jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect
to an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is neither
possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative
enactment dealing with procedure can provide for all cases that
may possibly arise. Courts, therefore, have inherent powers apart
from express provisions of law which are necessary for proper
discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law.
That is the doctrine which finds expression in the Section which
merely recognizes and preserves inherent powers of the High
Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in the
absence of any express provision, as inherent in their
constitution, all such powers as are necessary to do the right and
to undo a wrong in course of administration of justice on the
principle quando lex aliquid alique concedit, conceditur et id sine
quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While
exercising powers under the Section, the Court does not function
as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent jurisdiction under the
Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and
with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex
debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the
administration of which alone courts exist. Authority of the court
exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has
power to prevent such abuse. It would be an abuse of process of
the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and
prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that
initiation or continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of
court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the
ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is
sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials
to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any
offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto.
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind
the distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence or
where there is evidence which is clearly inconsistent with the
accusations made, and a case where there is legal evidence
which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations.
When exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the
High Court would not ordinarily embark upon an enquiry
whether the evidence in question is reliable or not or whether on
a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained.
That is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt
should not be an instrument of oppression, or, needless
harassment. Court should be circumspect and judicious in
exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and
circumstances into consideration before issuing process, lest it
would be an instrument in the hands of a private complainant to
unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the same
time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused
to short-circuit a prosecution and bring about its sudden death.
The scope of exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code
and the categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its
power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of
process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice
were set out in some detail by this Court in State of Haryana v.
8 As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under
Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of
the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be
careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based
on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised
to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest
Court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima
facie decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and
hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and
produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether
factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true
perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and
fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High
Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the
proceeding at any stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S.
Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC 892), Dr. Raghubir
Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would
not be proper for the High Court to analyse the case of the
complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to determine
whether a conviction would be sustainable and on such premises,
arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be quashed. It
would be erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude
that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. In proceeding
instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent powers to quash
the proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint
does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or
oppressive. If the allegations set out in the complaint do not
constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken by the
Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in
exercise of the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code. It
is not, however, necessary that there should be meticulous
analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether the case
would end in conviction or acquittal. The complaint/F.I.R. has to
be read as a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the
allegations in the light of the statement made on oath of the
complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the ingredients of the
offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show
that the complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in
that event there would be no justification for interference by the
High Court. When an information is lodged at the police station
and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the informant
would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected
during the investigation and evidence led in Court which decides
the fate of the accused person. The allegations of mala fides
against the informant are of no consequence and cannot by itself
be the basis for quashing the proceeding.”
16.The above settled position of law has also been reiterated by the
Supreme Court in Priti Saraf & anr v. State of NCT of Delhi & anr,
2021 SCC Online SC 206, and it has been said that inherent power of
the High Court is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised
with great care and circumspection before embarking to scrutinize a
complaint/FIR/ charge-sheet in deciding whether the case is the rarest
of rare cases, to scuttle the prosecution at its inception. It is settled
that whether the allegations in the complaint were true, is to be
decided on the basis of evidence during the trial. In the matter of
exercise of inherent power by the High Court, the only requirement is
to see whether continuance of the proceedings would be a total abuse
of the process of the Court.
17.In the above backdrop it may be appropriate to mention here that
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, preserves the inherent
powers of the High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any
court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does not confer
new powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in
the High Court. The High Court, while forming an opinion whether a
criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR should be quashed in
exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr. P.C., must evaluate
whether the ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent
power. While inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and
plenitude, it has to be exercised to secure ends of justice or to prevent
an abuse of the process of any court.
18.The instant petition, when looked from all angles, requires and
demands full dress trial and examination of facts by this Court as if it
is in appeal and acting as an appellate court and to draw its own
conclusion vis-à-vis impugned FIR, complaint and proceedings
emanating therefrom. This is not the aim and objective of provisions
of Section 482 Cr. P.C. more particularly when petition on hand does
not unveil any ground muchless cogent or material one, to indicate
that the inherent powers are to be exercised to prevent abuse of
process of law and to secure ends of justice. In that view of matter,
impugned FIR does not call for any interference qua petitioner and as
a consequence of which, petition on hand is liable to be dismissed.
19.For the reasons discussed above, the instant petition is without any
merit and is, accordingly, dismissed with connected CM(s). Interim
direction, if any, shall stand vacated.